HIST 3812A Portfolio
Matthew Burgstaller
Student Number: 100974055

History is less about what happened in the past, and more about what we chose to remember.  As cliché as this sounds, it is very true, and as history gets digitalized, it becomes even more relevant to ask ourselves what important details do we want to remember.  The act of digitalizing can change the way people look at certain events in history for the better as well as for the worse.  Digitalized formats can bring a lot of creativity towards how certain events in time are viewed and can also digitally preserve deteriorating physical forms of history.  However, it can also be misleading and produce false narratives of the past if the proper research is not done.   
During the process of digitalization, historians need to figure out how to infringe as minimally as possible on the authenticity of the original object, while still producing a copy of it through a new format.   In order for histories not to drastically change as they become digitalized, the copy must be connected to the historical narrative of the original through references made in the information presented with the replica.  Failure to provide contextual information along with a physical re-rendering of history can lead to a misinterpretation of the past, which is not only false but can be offensive.  
It is very important to pay attention to the ethical implications attached to history when it is being digitised, as during this process it is very easy for the dialog to be altered and misrepresented into something that can cause offense.  One such example of this is the Triumphal Arch replica that was erected in Trafalgar Square in 2016 to pay tribute to the original in Syria after it had been destroyed by Isis.  The arch was 3D printed with the latest technology and its creators proclaimed it to be extremely detailed that they were even considering replicating the cobwebs (Factum Foundation, 2016).  Once the replica was complete however, the level of detail did not match up to expectations.  The 3D model was much smaller than the original, lacked the weathering and detail that made the original authentic, and presented little information alongside the display about the story of the arch (Kamash, 2017: 612).   The problem here is not the level of detail, but instead the lack of contextual narrative, as the replica fails to really educate the public on the actual history of the Triumphal Arch.  To add to the negative publicity, the idea to place the replica arch in the middle of Trafalgar Square was seen by members of the public to reflect colonial tendencies on the Triumphal Arch (Kamash, 2017: 616).   When replicating history, important steps have to be taken to make sure we signify the true motives behind the replication in order to best preserve the historical significance of what was being digitalized.  It was not about showcasing the advancements in 3D printing technology in a first world country, it was about commemorating the beauty and historical narrative of the Triumphal Arch in a safe place where the many people could see it.  
The medium of gaming can be a very useful way to explain and teach history to a wide variety of audiences.  Video games are linearly orchestrated in a comparable fashion to the path of history’s narrative that is documented through our archives of writings, (Graham & Kee, 272-73). The problem however with history gaming in the current market is that the majority of games are being produced purely for the sake of entertainment and there are not enough games being produced for educational purpose. In video games the code used to develop the game asks the creator to do research and produce an argument for the explanation of the game in the same way a traditional research paper asks student to back up a thesis (Graham & Kee, 281-82).  If the discipline of history can encourage more historically accurate games to be made, then they would be extremely beneficial to education. 
In the March 5th lecture History in Video Games, the class discussed the game Kingdom Come: Deliverance, as the developers had praised the game for being an extremely historically accurate depiction of medieval Bohemia.  Yet it had received backlash for having narrative that contained no people of colour, despite there being strong evidence that medieval Bohemia was multiethnic, and failed to include any female character roles or even respectable interactive options.   As games reproduce the past, they also bring the replication into the present (Graham, 2014).   Today ethics must be considered while reconfiguring the past, as the person commanding the character is situated in the present. 
Being replications of the past, the historic accuracy of these games should be judged by how well their rules reflect the conditions and circumstances of the historical period of play and not so much by the accuracy of their graphical content (Graham, 2014).  These rules set the tone of the story being told through the game and reflect messages about the past in the same way that they can be expressed through a traditional essay paper (Graham, 2014).  Kingdom Come: Deliverance could still present the historical ethics of medieval Bohemia by assigning them to the non-playable characters and integrating today’s ethical decision making into the playable commands and rules of the game.   The point of digital history is not to go back in time and live the lives of our ancestors, the point is to create a platform where we can observe how things used to be in the context of the past. 
When history gets digitalized it opens up new opportunities to learn about the past.  History as a subject has the potential to be taught and dissected in a far more interactive and interesting way through the use of the digital world.  Digitalised forms of history that go beyond the constraints of websites and forum posts, can be integrated into the way we learn about the past.  We need to see the potential in these new digital technologies and utilize them (Graham & Kee, 271). Digital history provides a new medium to demonstrate knowledge that encourages creativity.  Historic mash ups and remixes are examples of projects that, if done correctly, can be used to harness this creative medium to portray different perspectives that would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to be displayed through a traditional method of academic evaluation.
Through digital mediums history can be taken apart and put back together again in ways that bring attention to new issues within the first context of witch it came.  If the proper information is given in the paradata surrounding the new remixed copy, the authenticity and link to the original will remain still enacted.  Remixes provide a fresh new way of looking at history and allow for more creativity to explore the possibilities of expression.  
Throughout the semester my partner Marc and I worked with a remixed model of Terry Fox whose upper body had been fused with a horse to create a mythical Greek centaur.  Copying the statue of Terry Fox to create a remix version of it distorts the original but at the same time allows for an interesting new perspective on the original. Throughout history the art of copying has be practised in every civilization, with each copy adding another creative twist to the story of the original object (Jacob, 2016). Like 3D models of artifacts acquired during colonial purges, If the proper documentation is done on the copies connection to the original, then the greater history and significance of the object can be displayed through the copy. Michael Carter explains in his article how remixing the original could be seen as offensive to the culture from which is draws province from (Carter, 2017: 5). This could be a problem as Terry Fox is an iconic Canadian figure and disrupting his image to turn him into a mythological Greek creature would be offensive if the honorable intentions were not described properly in the paradata. Carter supports this by explaining how if the new remixed model is attached to the paradata then it remains tethered to the original object and can therefore retain its integrity (Carter, 2017: 18). 
Inevitably all things deteriorate, but through the aid of digital applications, we can postpone this inevitability and better preserve the past.  This does come at a cost however, as the more an original is replicated the more it strides further away from its aura of authenticity. As the technological ability to replicate becomes more effortless, the significance of the original becomes less important (Benjamin, 1969: 4). With current new technologies such as VR providing people with the feeling of physically being in the presence of major historical monuments from the comfort of their living room, the actual awestruck emotion that one feels when experiencing the original historical monument is lessened as they have seen it in many detailed copies prior to first visiting it in person. The great deal of effort once needed to replicate a great historic object, is now replaced with mechanical reproduction that takes less effort and provides greater detailed copies. This over-saturates the true significance of the object by having copies of it easily available to anyone who wishes to see them.
Producing history in a digital form does not make it any more or less different then history produced in a more traditional form; they are both presenting a description of the past.  In Nowviskie’s blog, she mentions William Morris ’s argument that “anything that gets between a man’s hand and his work, you see, is more or less bad for him” and that “you can’t have art without resistance in the material” (Nowviskie, 2016).  Nowviskie then proceeds to counteract this argument by explaining that the resistance in the technology is the time and effort in figuring out how to use it.  The effort to writing a traditional history essay can be replicated through the hardships in creating a digital project. These two different methodologies can be detailing the same historic moment and produce equally accurate descriptions of the past. Allowing the methodologies to be different however enables for more creative opportunities present historic moments in different perspectives that make the audience look at the subject matter in a new light.	 
As digital technology such as 3D printing, digital modeling, and augmented reality becomes more incorporated into the lives of humanity, we must take more consideration into the observance of history through these new mediums of display.  This technology provides us with the ability to better preserve, better reconstruct, and better replicate the past then traditional forms of history have ever been able to come close to.  Yet in order to do this properly we need to carefully record the process of digitalizing in order to ensure the level of detail that what we are copying holds, does not get lost in the process.  
When looking at digital replicas of the past it is less important to decipher the originals from the copies and more essential to differentiate between the poorly done and the well done (Latour & Lowe, 2010: 10).  No matter how pristine the digital copy is, it will always be replication.  Context is what gives a replication meaning, and therefore no copy will ever share the same sense of space and time (Benjamin, 1969: 3).  Sometimes history should remain history and shouldn’t be something that we try to keep bringing back to life through copious amounts of copies.   We can remember the past and we can recreate simulations, but we cannot relive it. 

# Work Sited

Factum Foundation. 2016. “IDA Palmyra Arch Copy.” 

Kamash, Zena 2017. ‘Postcard to Palmyra’: bringing the public into debates over post-conflict reconstruction in the Middle East. World Archaeology 

Graham, S. 2014. Pulling Back the Curtain: Writing History Through Video Games. In Web Writing: Why and How for Liberal Arts Teaching and Learning, ed. Jack Dougherty and Tennyson O’Donnell 

Kelly, T. Mills, 2014. True Facts or False Facts—Which Are More Authentic? In K. Kee, ed.

Benjamin, Walter. “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” InIlluminations, 217-51. New York: Schocken Books, 1968.

Latour, Bruno, and A. Lowe. “The Migration of the Aura – or How to Explore the Original Through Its Facsimiles”, In. T. Bartscherer and R. Coover (editors) Switching Codes. Thinking Through Digital Technology in the Humanities and the Arts, University of Chicago Press pp. 275-297, 2011.

Nowviskie, Bethany. “Resistance in the Materials”, Blog.

Gunkel, David J. 2008 Rethinking the Digital Remix: Mash‐ups and the Metaphysics of Sound Recording. Popular Music and Society 31, no. 4: 489–510. 

Jacob, Sam. 2016. The Copy in Contemporary Culture is Both Despised and Feared. Chicago: University of Illinois.

Carter, Michael. 2017. The Life of Attributes: Meta and Paradata as 3D Point and Object DNA for Heritage Providence. Ryerson University.





